README.md, before:

# JET Encoding Guide

This guide can be accessed [here](https://jaded-encoding-thaumaturgy.github.io/JET-guide/).

## How to run

`pip install mkdocs-material mkdocstrings[python] pymdown-extensions`<br>
`mkdocs serve` to host it locally with hot-reload

## How to configure

Please check out these links.<br>

https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/setup/ <br>
https://www.mkdocs.org/getting-started/#adding-pages

If you want to host this on a custom domain make sure to create a `CNAME` file in the ./docs directory and put your domain in there.<br>
Like it was done [here](https://github.com/Vodes/muxtools-doc/blob/master/docs/CNAME).

## Contributing

We welcome
any and all contributions
to this guide.
If you would like to contribute,
you can do so
via any of the below methods:

* Have any suggestions
  or found an issue?
  Leave an [issue](https://github.com/Jaded-Encoding-Thaumaturgy/JET-guide/issues)
  or join our [Discord server](https://discord.gg/gkzJFe9upH).
* Would you like to
  contribute a page?
  Please create a [Pull Request](https://github.com/Jaded-Encoding-Thaumaturgy/JET-guide/pulls)
  and we will review it
  as soon as we can!

Commit message:

Expression Guide (#22)
* Expr: Write most of the guide

* Use a requirements.txt

* Expr: Make it clear akarin supports regular clip ops too

Also fix a small typo

* Expr: Minor fixes and suggestion implementations

* Expr: Update operator table

README.md, after:

# JET Encoding Guide

This guide can be accessed [here](https://jaded-encoding-thaumaturgy.github.io/JET-guide/).

## How to run

1. Run the following command:

    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```

2. Run the following command to host it locally with hot-reload.

    ```bash
    mkdocs serve
    ```

## How to configure

Please check out these links.<br>

https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/setup/ <br>
https://www.mkdocs.org/getting-started/#adding-pages

If you want to host this on a custom domain make sure to create a `CNAME` file in the ./docs directory and put your domain in there.<br>
Like it was done [here](https://github.com/Vodes/muxtools-doc/blob/master/docs/CNAME).

## Contributing

We welcome
any and all contributions
to this guide.
If you would like to contribute,
you can do so
via any of the below methods:

* Have any suggestions
  or found an issue?
  Leave an [issue](https://github.com/Jaded-Encoding-Thaumaturgy/JET-guide/issues)
  or join our [Discord server](https://discord.gg/gkzJFe9upH).
* Would you like to
  contribute a page?
  Please create a [Pull Request](https://github.com/Jaded-Encoding-Thaumaturgy/JET-guide/pulls)
  and we will review it
  as soon as we can!
